# TCGA

Make sure to download the clinical file before running the code. 

Motivation: Breast cancer can be caused by inherited gene mutations like mutations in the TP53 and PIK3CA genes, or mutations caused by the environment. Cancer has many associated genetic ex-pressions that can be studied to determine the molecular interactions that happen with these cells as well as interactions between different cancer cells themselves. Therefore, cancer phenotypes can be determined by understanding the various molecular interactions associated with the cancer cells of interest. Additionally, correlations between these interactions and cancer prognosis can be deter-mined by using collected patient data, including gene expression data and prognosis for each patient. In Development of a Prognostic Model for Breast Cancer Survival in an Open Challenge Environ-ment1, Cheng at el. hypothesized that there exist signatures comprised of coexpressed genes that can determine the molecular interactions across multiple cancers. Following that same line of logic, TCGA breast cancer survival data was cross-examined with gene mutation data for the patients in the TCGA breast cancer study to determine if the TP53 and PIK3CA mutated genes can help predict survival status of patients. Survival analysis with the Kaplan Meier model and COX proportional hazards model was performed. A Gradient Boosting Model was used to perform survival prediction across patient data given their mutation status.
Results: Survival curves and cumulative hazards curves were successfully made based on patient mutation status. The COX Proportional Hazards model showed that determining the survival of a pa-tient was generally random. The GBM using XGBoost model resulted in an 83% accuracy of predict-ing the survival status of a patient based on their gene mutation status. However, these results varied from run to run, signifying that more data must be acquired for accurate predictions. Additionally, gene expression data should be used in the future to have more covariates that can be used for extra analysis. 
